© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
A Review Paper on Networking Topologies 
Jasdeep Singh, Raj Kumar, 
RIMT University, Mandi Gobindgarh, Punjab 
Email id- jasdeepsingh@rimt.ac.in,raj.kumar@rimt.ac.in 

ABSTRACT: Topology refers to the process of ordering, arranging, or linking things in a certain way. As a result, network 
topology refers to the process of organising, arranging, or connecting several devices in a network. The many ways in which 
devices can be connected to one another are referred to as network topology. These network topologies have been divided into 
sections depending on how devices are connected and how data flows between them. The topologies of star, ring, hybrid, mesh, 
tree, and bus are some of the topologies that are utilised in various industries for system layout. The merits and disadvantages of 
these topologies based on connections and data flow have been explored in this study. This article discusses the importance of 
network topology. This article discusses the growing demand for these topologies in numerous start-ups and global corporations. 
It highlights how the future of topologies is bright since every organisation needs to set up a network that must be properly 
organised, resulting in increased use of network topologies. 
KEYWORDS: Cable, Data, Network, System, Topology.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Networking topology is the process of arranging several elements (such as links and nodes) of a network. It 
can be referred as a geometric representation of how several systems can be linked and communicate with 
each other[1]. 
1.1 Importance of network topology: 
The network layout is critical for a variety of causes. Above all, it is important for any network’s operation 
and performance. Picking the correct topology for operational model of any company can increase 
performance while also it makes it simpler to discover errors, rectify mistakes, and allocate resource more 
effectively through the network to make sure best network health[2]. 
A software-created network topology diagram is widely used to demonstrate and alter the architecture and 
structure of a network. The most significant reason for these diagrams is that they may give visual 
representations of both physical and logical layouts, helping managers to comprehend the relationships 
between devices during troubleshooting[3]. 
An efficient and correctly managed topology can boost energy and efficiency of data that can assist to 
minimise operating and maintaining of expenses. The manner a network is structured may make or break 
functioning of network, connection, and protection from downtime. To guarantee that any network is efficient 
and healthy, effective network administration and monitoring necessitates a thorough understanding of both 
the logical and physical topology[4]. 
1.2 Types of Topologies: 
Figure 1 shows several types of network topologies used for arrangement of systems. There are several types 
of topologies that are used for arranging systems. These are   discussed below. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
324 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
Star Topology
Ring Topology
Mesh 
Topology
Network 
topology
1.2.1 Physical topology: 
1.2.2 Bus topology: 
Logical 
topology
Tree Topology
Physical 
topology
Hybrid 
Topology
Bus Topology
Point to point 
Topology
Figure 1: Representation of several types of Network Topologies used for arrangement of systems. 
It deals with the physical connections between several nodes, cables, wires, etc. It is the set-up of numerous 
elements including links, nodes, etc. of a network, involving device placement and installation of code. In 
simpler words, it can be said as the physical set-up of the nodes, workstations and cables of network[5].  
Each system and device present in network are connected to a single cable in a network of bus topology. It 
sends data in a single way from one end to the other. Line terminators are present on both ends of the shared 
channel.  Whenever any node wants to transmit a signal through the network, it make that happen by sending 
a message through network. Irrespective of whom the message has been sent to, it will be received by all 
accessible stations present in network. In this, there are no bi-directional characteristics. It is a multi-point 
connection with a non-robust topology as the topology crashes if the backbone breaks[6]. It is also referred as 
line topology and sometimes as backbone topology. Data flows in the same direction as the cable.  
If multiple hosts try to send data at same time, it might face some issues. That is why to overcome the issue it 
utilises Carrier Sense Multiple Access / Collision Avoidance technology (CSMA/CD) or identifies one host 
as Bus Master. It is a basic kind of networking in which the failure of one device has no impact on the other 
devices. However, if the common communication channel fails, all other devices will cease working. It is 
commonly used in standard networks such as 802.3 (Ethernet) and 802.4 standard networks[7]. Figure 2 
represents how devices can be linked to each other over a network in bus topology and how data flows from 
one end to another. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
325 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
Figure 2: Represents of how devices are connected in bus topology and how data flows from one end 
to another. 
 CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple Access):  
It is a type of media access control, which is used for regulating flow of data to ensure integrity of data, or that 
packets do not get lost. Generally, two different approaches are used for dealing with the problems that are 
caused when any two nodes deliver messages at the same time. 
 Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA CD):  
It is a technique of access that is used for detecting data collision. The transmitter will cease delivering data if 
a collision is detected. As a result, it focuses on recovery after a data collision. 
 Carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA):  
It is a technique for avoiding collisions by determining whether transmission medium is busy or not. If the one 
who send data is busy, he will wait until the media is accessible. This way efficiently reduces the probabilities 
of a collision. Recovery after the collision is not supported. 
1.2.3 Ring topology: 
Each host machine in this kind of topology links to precisely two other machines, forming a circular network 
structure. Whenever any host wants to interact with or send any message to a host that is not directly next to 
it, the data is routed via all intermediary hosts. The system, which gets the message of preceding system, passes 
it to the next system[8]. The administrator may just require one additional cable to join one more host in the 
current arrangement. It is similar to bus topology; the only difference is that its ends are connected. In this also 
data flow, take place in one direction only in a loop, which continues to move endlessly in the loop. However, 
by giving two connections between each network Node, it may be turned bidirectional, which is referred as 
Dual ring topology. As both the ends are linked, there is no termination point. In it, data moves in clockwise 
direction. When a ring topology with a high no. of nodes is utilised, many repeaters are needed for the reason 
that if someone wishes to transmit data to the final node in a ring topology with 90 nodes, the data must transit 
through 89 nodes before reaching the 90th node[9]. As a result, repeaters are employed in the network for 
prevention of loss of data. Figure 3 represents of how devices are connected in Ring topology and how data 
flows in loop. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
326 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
Figure 3: Represents of how devices are connected in Ring topology and how data flows in loop. 
1.2.4 Star topology: 
It is most commonly used topology. All of the systems in this topology are linked to a solo hub using a cable. 
This hub acts as the centre node, with all other nodes linked with it. This hub might be passive in nature that 
means not intelligent, such as broadcasting devices, or it can be intelligent, i.e., active hubs. Repeaters are 
present in hubs, which are active. The main computer is referred to as a server, and the devices connected to 
it as clients. The devices are connected through coaxial cable or RJ-45 connections[10]. 
In a physical star architecture, hubs or switches are primarily utilised as connecting devices. In this there is no 
direct interaction of devices, any system have to interact with the hub first. In this to reach its destination, 
information transmitted from any node in network must travel through the main system, which acts as a 
repeater and helps in avoiding loss of data. Figure 4 represents how devices are connected in Star topology 
and how data flows between devices. 
Figure 4:  Representation of how devices are connected in Star topology and how data flows in 
loop. 
1.2.5 Mesh Topology: 
In this, a host is linked with multiple other systems. In it, point-to-point connection is available between any 
two systems. Some devices may be present in which only few have point-to-point connection between them. 
There are two kinds of mesh networks: first, one is complete mesh and other one is partial mesh. Mesh 
topology, which are partially interconnected, have fewer nodes with only two or three connections, whereas 
mesh topology, which are fully interconnected, contains all connected nodes as shown in Figure 5. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
327 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
Figure 5:  Represents of how devices are connected in Mesh topology and how data flows in 
devices. 
1.2.6 Tree topology: 
The network is divided into several levels/layers using this topology. A network is divided into 3 categories 
of network devices, mostly in LANs. The lowest layer is the access layer, which is where systems are linked. 
The distribution layer is the intermediate layer that acts as a link between the top and lower layer. The topmost 
layer, referred as core layer, is the network's nerve centre. A point-to-point link exists between all nearby hosts. 
In a similar way as the bus, topology, in case if the root fails the whole network faces the problem. It is not, 
however, the only site of failure. Every connection acts as a single point of failure, separating the network in 
segments, which are inaccessible if it fails. Figure 6 represents of how devices are connected in tree topology 
and how data flows in devices. 
Figure 6:  Representation of how devices are connected in tree topology and how data flows in devices. 
1.2.7 Hybrid topology: 
It can be said as combination of several topologies. These are commonly used in big Multinational companies 
where there are personalized topologies for each department. These provide a great flexibility to the network 
system. Different topologies can be chosen and implement according to the needs and requirement of the user. 
Figure 7 represents of how devices are linked in hybrid topology using an arrangement of star and ring 
topology. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
328 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
Figure 7:  Representation of how devices are linked in hybrid topology using an arrangement of star 
and ring topology. 
2. DISCUSSION 
Computer science is a really important and wide branch of engineering. There are many subjects, which are 
included in the course, which are important for students to have knowledge of such as Analysis of 
Algorithms, Data structure, Database management, Networking, and many more. These are the subjects, 
which are important while preparing for several competitive exam, interviews and many technical exams. 
These subjects comprises of many algorithms, laws and concepts, which are basis for development of 
various software programs.  
Networking is one such subject which comprises concepts such as several network terminologies network 
topologies including Star, Bus, mesh, tree and ring topology, several types of computer networks, several 
protocols including Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), Internet Protocol (IP), Hyper Text Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP), and many more which ensures secure and smooth transfer of data, and many more 
concepts. These concepts are important and deep and focused study of these topics is required by students 
to understand networking. Few of these concepts have been discussed in this paper. Various topologies have 
been discussed in this paper. 
3. CONCLUSION 
Networking topology is an important concept in networking which deals with several topologies, which 
defines several ways on how several devices can be connected to each other for exchange of data. There are 
types of topologies based on different factors. These topologies have been discussed in this paper. Importance 
of these topologies have been discussed in this paper. It is explained how several arrangements of devices are 
done in these topologies. Ring topology with its diagrammatic representation along with advantages and 
disadvantages have been discussed in this paper. Similarly, several other topologies such as mesh, star, bus, 
and tree and hybrid topology have been discussed in this paper. From every single small to big company, all 
of these have their several types of networks in which different devices are connected. These connections are 
done by keeping in mind benefits of several topologies and then accordingly connections are done. As 
everyday new start, companies are set up so there is a high need of using these topologies, thereby increasing 
future scope and use of these topologies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
E. Ozkan-Canbolat and A. Beraha, “Configuration and innovation related network topology,” J. Innov. Knowl., 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.jik.2016.01.013. 
E. Ozkan-Canbolat and A. Beraha, “A configurational approach to network topology design for product innovation,” J. Bus. Res., 2016, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.04.115. 
D. L. Harrington et al., “Network topology and functional connectivity disturbances precede the onset of Huntington’s disease,” Brain, 
2015, doi: 10.1093/brain/awv145. 
G. Engels et al., “Clinical pain and functional network topology in Parkinson’s disease: a resting-state fMRI study,” J. Neural Transm., 
2018, doi: 10.1007/s00702-018-1916-y. 
X. Diego, L. Marcon, P. Müller, and J. Sharpe, “Key Features of Turing Systems are Determined Purely by Network Topology,” Phys. 
Rev. X, 2018, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.8.021071. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
329 
© 2018 JETIR September 2018, Volume 5, Issue 9                                                        
www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162) 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[10] 
E. Heasley, N. Clifford, and J. Millington, “Integrating network topology metrics into studies of catchment-level effects on habitat 
diversity,” Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss., 2018, doi: 10.5194/hess-2018-89. 
V. Deshpande, H. Badis, and L. George, “BTCmap: Mapping bitcoin peer-to-peer network topology,” in 2018 IFIP/IEEE International 
Conference on Performance Evaluation and Modeling in Wired and Wireless Networks, PEMWN 2018, 2018, doi: 
10.23919/PEMWN.2018.8548904. 
B. Bangerter, S. Talwar, R. Arefi, and K. Stewart, “Networks and devices for the 5G era,” IEEE Commun. Mag., 2014, doi: 
10.1109/MCOM.2014.6736748. 
G. Rosell-Tarragó, E. Cozzo, and A. Díaz-Guilera, “A complex network framework to model cognition: Unveiling correlation structures 
from connectivity,” Complexity, 2018, doi: 10.1155/2018/1918753. 
L. M. Wierenga et al., “A multisample study of longitudinal changes in brain network architecture in 4–13-year-old children,” Hum. 
Brain Mapp., 2018, doi: 10.1002/hbm.23833. 
JETIRFH06055 Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
330 